Low difficulty questions

Here are some of the more basic questions you will encounter, and my answers:

    What are the first five commands you type on a *nix server after login?

        lsblk to see information on all block devices
        who to see who is logged into the server
        top to get a sense of what is running on the server
        df -khT to view the amount of disk space available on the server
        netstat to see what TCP network connections are active

    How do you make a process run in the background, and what are the advantages of doing so?

    You can make a process run in the background by adding the special character & at the end of the command. Generally, applications that take too long to execute, and don’t require user interaction are sent to the background so that we can continue our work in the terminal. (Citation)

    Is running these commands as root a good or bad idea?

    Running (everything) as root is bad due to two major issues. The first is risk. Nothing prevents you from making a careless mistake when you are logged in as root. If you try to change the system in a potentially harmful way, you need to use sudo, which introduces a pause (while you’re entering the password) to ensure that you aren’t about to make a mistake.

    The second reason is security. Systems are harder to hack if you don’t know the admin user’s login information. Having access to root means you already have one half of the working set of admin credentials.

    What is the difference between rm and rm -rf?

    The rm command by itself only deletes the named files (and not directories). With -rf you add two additional features: The -r, -R, or --recursive flag recursively deletes the directory’s contents, including hidden files and subdirectories, and the -f, or --force, flag makes rm ignore nonexistent files, and never prompt for confirmation.

    Compress.tgz has a file size of approximately 15GB. How can you list its contents, and how do you list them only for a specific file?

    To list the file’s contents:

    tar tf archive.tgz

    To extract a specific file:

    tar xf archive.tgz filename

Medium difficulty questions

Here are some harder questions you might encounter, and my answers:

    What is RAID? What is RAID 0, RAID 1, RAID 5, RAID 6, and RAID 10?

    A RAID (Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disks) is a technology used to increase the performance and/or reliability of data storage. The RAID levels are:

        RAID 0: Also known as disk striping, which is a technique that breaks up a file, and spreads the data across all of the disk drives in a RAID group. There are no safeguards against failure. (Citation)
        RAID 1: A popular disk subsystem that increases safety by writing the same data on two drives. Called mirroring, RAID1 does not increase write performance, but read performance may increase up to the sum of each disks’ performance. Also, if one drive fails, the second drive is used, and the failed drive is manually replaced. After replacement, the RAID controller duplicates the contents of the working drive onto the new one.
        RAID 5: A disk subsystem that increases safety by computing parity data and increasing speed. RAID 5 does this by interleaving data across three or more drives (striping). Upon failure of a single drive, subsequent reads can be calculated from the distributed parity such that no data is lost.
        RAID 6: Which extends RAID 5 by adding another parity block. This level requires a minimum of four disks, and can continue to execute read/write with any two concurrent disk failures. RAID 6 does not have a performance penalty for reading operations, but it does have a performance penalty on write operations because of the overhead associated with parity calculations.
        RAID 10: Also known as RAID 1+0, RAID 10 combines disk mirroring and disk striping to protect data. It requires a minimum of four disks, and stripes data across mirrored pairs. As long as one disk in each mirrored pair is functional, data can be retrieved. If two disks in the same mirrored pair fail, all data will be lost because there is no parity in the striped sets. (Citation)

    Which port is used for the ping command?

    The ping command uses ICMP. Specifically, it uses ICMP echo requests and ICMP echo reply packets.

    ICMP does not use either UDP or TCP communication services: Instead, it uses raw IP communication services. This means that the ICMP message is carried directly in an IP datagram data field.

    What is the difference between a router and a gateway? What is the default gateway?

    Router describes the general technical function (layer 3 forwarding), or a hardware device intended for that purpose, while gateway describes the function for the local segment (providing connectivity to elsewhere). You could also state that you "set up a router as a gateway." Another term is hop, which describes forwarding between subnets.

    The term default gateway is used to mean the router on your LAN, which has the responsibility of being the first point of contact for traffic to computers outside the LAN.

    Explain the boot process for Linux.

    BIOS -> Master Boot Record (MBR) -> GRUB -> the kernel -> init -> runlevel

    How do you check the error messages while the server is booting up?

    Kernel messages are always stored in the kmsg buffer, visible via the dmesg command.

    Boot issues and errors call for a system administrator to look into certain important files, in conjunction with particular commands, which are each handled differently by different versions of Linux:

        /var/log/boot.log is the system boot log, which contains all that unfolded during the system boot.
        /var/log/messages stores global system messages, including the messages logged during system boot.
        /var/log/dmesg contains kernel ring buffer information.

    What is the difference between a symbolic link and a hard link?

    Updated Aug 30, 2019 | Editor's note: this answer original said 'a hard link is a mirror copy of the original file,' which is not accurate. Thank you to Bruce Bowen for providing the following answer:

    A hard link is a directory reference to the same inode that the first directory entry refers to, and the inode is updated to increase the reference count to know there is a new link to the data. This means that when a file is 'deleted', the directory is updated to remove the file name and the inode for the data has the reference count decremented. The data of the file won't be freed unless the reference count goes to 0. Since inodes are unique for each file system, hard links can't cross file systems. Soft links create a way to for a directory entry to say "the file information is really stored in another directory entry". Soft links break if the 'another directory entry' is deleted.


    So a 'user' way to describe the difference between a hard and soft link is that a hard link is a link to the file data and a soft link is a link to another file name.

    How do you change kernel parameters? What kernel options might you need to tune?

    To set the kernel parameters in Unix-like systems, first edit the file /etc/sysctl.conf. After making the changes, save the file and run the sysctl -p command. This command makes the changes permanent without rebooting the machine

    Explain the /proc filesystem.

    The /proc filesystem is virtual, and provides detailed information about the kernel, hardware, and running processes. Since /proc contains virtual files, it is called the virtual file system. These virtual files have unique qualities. Most of them are listed as zero bytes in size.

    Virtual files such as /proc/interrupts, /proc/meminfo, /proc/mounts and /proc/partitions provide an up-to-the-moment glimpse of the system’s hardware. Others, such as /proc/filesystems and the /proc/sys directory provide system configuration information and interfaces.

    How do you run a script as another user without their password?

    For example, if you were editing the sudoers file (such as /private/etc/sudoers), you might use visudo to add the following:

    user1 ALL=(user2) NOPASSWD: /opt/scripts/bin/generate.sh

    What is the UID 0 toor account? Have you been compromised?

    The toor user is an alternative superuser account, where toor is root spelled backward. It is intended to be used with a non-standard shell, so the default shell for root does not need to change.

    This purpose is important. Shells which are not part of the base distribution, but are instead installed from ports or packages, are installed in /usr/local/bin; which, by default, resides on a different file system. If root’s shell is located in /usr/local/bin and the file system containing /usr/local/bin is not mounted, root could not log in to fix a problem, and the sysadmin would have to reboot into single-user mode to enter the shell’s path.

Advanced questions

Here are the even more difficult questions you may encounter:

    How does tracert work and what protocol does it use?

    The command tracert—or traceroute depending on the operating system—allows you to see exactly what routers you touch as you move through the chain of connections to your final destination. If you end up with a problem where you can’t connect to or ping your final destination, a tracert can help in that you can tell exactly where the chain of connections stops. (Citation)

    With this information, you can contact the correct people; whether it be your own firewall, your ISP, your destination’s ISP, or somewhere in the middle. The tracert command—like ping—uses the ICMP protocol, but also can use the first step of the TCP three-way handshake to send SYN requests for a response.

    What is the main advantage of using chroot? When and why do we use it? What is the purpose of the mount /dev, mount /proc, and mount /sys commands in a chroot environment? 

    An advantage of having a chroot environment is that the filesystem is isolated from the physical host, since chroot has a separate filesystem inside your filesystem. The difference is that chroot uses a newly created root (/) as its root directory.

    A chroot jail lets you isolate a process and its children from the rest of the system. It should only be used for processes that don’t run as root, as root users can break out of the jail easily.

    The idea is that you create a directory tree where you copy or link in all of the system files needed for the process to run. You then use the chroot() system call to tell it the root directory now exists at the base of this new tree, and then start the process running in that chroot’d environment. Since the command then can’t reference paths outside the modified root directory, it can’t perform operations (read, write, etc.) maliciously on those locations. (Citation)

    How do you protect your system from getting hacked?

    By following the principle of least privileges and these practices:

        Encrypt with public keys, which provides excellent security.
        Enforce password complexity.
        Understand why you are making exceptions to the rules above.
        Review your exceptions regularly.
        Hold someone to account for failure. (It keeps you on your toes.) (Citation)

    What is LVM, and what are the advantages of using it?

    LVM, or Logical Volume Management, uses a storage device management technology that gives users the power to pool and abstract the physical layout of component storage devices for easier and flexible administration. Using the device mapper Linux kernel framework, the current iteration (LVM2) can be used to gather existing storage devices into groups and allocate logical units from the combined space as needed.

    What are sticky ports?

    Sticky ports are one of the network administrator’s best friends and worst headaches. They allow you to set up your network so that each port on a switch only permits one (or a number that you specify) computer to connect on that port, by locking it to a particular MAC address.

    Explain port forwarding?

    When trying to communicate with systems on the inside of a secured network, it can be very difficult to do so from the outside—and with good reason. Therefore, the use of a port forwarding table within the router itself, or other connection management device, can allow specific traffic to automatically forward to a particular destination. For example, if you had a web server running on your network and you wanted to grant access to it from the outside, you would set up port forwarding to port 80 on the server in question. This would mean that anyone entering your IP address in a web browser would connect to the server’s website immediately.

    Please note, it is usually not recommended to allow access to a server from the outside directly into your network.

    What is a false positive and false negative in the case of IDS?

    When the Intrusion Detection System (IDS) device generates an alert for an intrusion which has actually not happened, this is false positive. If the device has not generated any alert and the intrusion has actually happened, this is the case of a false negative.

    Explain :(){ :|:& };: and how to stop this code if you are already logged into the system?

    This is a fork bomb. It breaks down as follows:

        :() defines the function, with : as the function name, and the empty parenthesis shows that it will not accept any arguments.
        { } shows the beginning and end of the function definition.
        :|: loads a copy of the function : into memory, and pipes its output to another copy of the : function, which also has to be loaded into memory.
        & makes the previous item a background process, so that the child processes will not get killed even though the parent gets auto-killed.
        : at the end executes the function again, and hence the chain reaction begins.

    The best way to protect a multi-user system is to use Privileged Access Management (PAM) to limit the number of processes a user can use.

    The biggest problem with a fork bomb is the fact it takes up so many processes. So, we have two ways of attempting to fix this if you are already logged into the system. One option is to execute a SIGSTOP command to stop the process, such as:

    killall -STOP -u user1

    If you can’t use the command line due to all processes being used, you will have to use exec to force it to run:

    exec killall -STOP -u user1

    With fork bombs, your best option is preventing them from becoming too big of an issue in the first place

    What is OOM killer and how does it decide which process to kill first?

    If memory is exhaustively used up by processes to the extent that possibly threatens the system’s stability, then the out of memory (OOM) killer comes into the picture.

    An OOM killer first has to select the best process(es) to kill. Best here refers to the process which will free up the maximum memory upon being killed, and is also the least important to the system. The primary goal is to kill the least number of processes to minimize the damage done, and at the same time maximize the amount of memory freed.

    To facilitate this goal, the kernel maintains an oom_score for each of the processes. You can see the oom_score of each of the processes in the /proc filesystem under the pid directory:

    $ cat /proc/10292/oom_score

    The higher the value of oom_score for any process, the higher its likelihood is of being killed by the OOM Killer in an out-of-memory situation. (Citation)




Q:1 Why LVM is required ?

Ans: LVM stands for Logical Volume Manager , to resize file system’s size online we required LVM partition in Linux. Size of LVM partition can be extended and reduced using the lvextend & lvreduce commands respectively.

Q:2 How To check Memory stats and CPU stats ?

Ans:  Using ‘free’ & ‘vmstat’ command we can display the physical and virtual memory statistics respectively.With the help of ‘sar’ command we see the CPU utilization & other stats.

Q:3 What does Sar provides and at which location Sar logs are stored ?

Ans: Sar Collect, report, or save system activity information. The default version of the sar command (CPU utilization report) might be one of the first facilities the  user  runs  to  begin system  activity investigation, because it monitors major system resources. If CPU utilization is near 100 percent (user + nice + system), the workload sampled is CPU-bound.

By  default log files of Sar command  is located at  /var/log/sa/sadd file, where the dd parameter indicates the current day.

Q:4 How to increase the size of LVM partition ?

Ans: Below are the Logical Steps :
– Use the lvextend command (lvextend -L +100M /dev/<Name of the LVM Partition> , in this example we are extending the size by 100MB.
– resize2fs /dev/<Name of the LVM Partition>
– check the size of partition using ‘df -h’ command

Q:5 How to reduce or shrink the size of LVM partition ?

Ans: Below are the logical Steps to reduce size of LVM partition :
-Umount the filesystem using umount command,
-use resize2fs command , e.g resiz2fs /dev/mapper/myvg-mylv 10G
-Now use the lvreduce command , e.g lvreduce -L 10G /dev/mapper/myvg-mylv

Above Command will shrink the size & will make the filesystem size 10GB.

 Q:6 How to create partition from the raw disk ?

Ans: Using fdisk utility we can create partitions from the raw disk.Below are the steps to create partition from the raw dsik :
– fdisk  /dev/hd* (IDE) or /dev/sd* (SCSI)
– Type n to create a new partition
–  After creating partition , type w command to write the changes to the partition table.

 Q:7 Where the kernel modules are located ?

Ans: The ‘/lib/modules/kernel-version/’ directory stores all kernel modules or compiled drivers in Linux operating system. Also with ‘lsmod’ command we can see all the installed kernel modules.

Q:8 What is umask ?

Ans: umask stands for ‘User file creation mask’, which determines the settings of a mask that controls which file permissions are set for files and directories when they are created.

Q:9 How to set the umask permanently for a user?

Ans: To set this value permanently for a user, it has to be put in the appropriate profile file which depends on the default shell of the user.

Q:10 How to change the default run level in linux ?

Ans: To change the run level we have to edit the file “/etc/inittab” and change initdefault entry ( id:5:initdefault:). Using ‘init’ command we change the run level temporary like ‘init 3’ , this command will move the system in runlevl 3.

Q:11 How to share a directory using nfs ?

Ans: To share a directory using nfs , first edit the configuration file ‘/etc/exportfs’ , add a entry like
‘/<directory-name>  <ip or Network>(Options)’ and then restart the nfs service.

Q:12 How to check and mount nfs share ?

Ans: Using ‘showmount’ command we can see what directories are shared via nfs e.g ‘showmount -e <ip address of nfs server>’.Using mount command we can mount the nfs share on linux machine.

Q:13 What are the default ports used for SMTP,DNS,FTP,DHCP,SSH and squid ?
Ans: Service      Port
SMTP          25
DNS            53
FTP             20 (data transfer) , 21 ( Connection established)
DHCP         67/UDP(dhcp server) , 68/UDP(dhcp client)
SSH            22
Squid         3128

Q:14 What is Network Bonding ?

Ans: Network bonding is the aggregation of multiple Lan cards into a single bonded interface to provide fault tolerance and high performance. Network bonding is also known as NIC Teaming.

Q:15 What  are the different modes of Network bonding in Linux ?

Ans: Below are list of modes used in Network Bonding :

balance-rr or 0 – round-robin mode for fault tolerance and load balancing.
active-backup or 1 – Sets active-backup mode for fault tolerance.
balance-xor or 2 – Sets an XOR (exclusive-or) mode for fault tolerance and load balancing.
broadcast or 3 – Sets a broadcast mode for fault tolerance. All transmissions are sent on all slave interfaces.
802.3ad or 4  – Sets an IEEE 802.3ad dynamic link aggregation mode. Creates aggregation groups that share the same speed & duplex settings.
balance-tlb or 5 –  Sets a Transmit Load Balancing (TLB) mode for fault tolerance & load balancing.
balance-alb or 6 –  Sets an Active Load Balancing (ALB) mode for fault tolerance & load balancing.

Q:16 How to check and verify the status the bond interface.

Ans: Using the command ‘cat /proc/net/bonding/bond0’ , we can check which mode is enabled and what lan cards are used in this bond. In this example we have one only one bond interface but we can have multiple bond interface like bond1,bond2 and so on.

Q:17 How to check default route and routing table ?

Ans: Using the Commands ‘netstat -nr’ and ‘route -n’ we can see the default route and routing tables.

Q:18 How to check which ports are listening in my Linux Server ?

Ans:  Use the Command ‘netstat –listen’ and ‘lsof -i’

Q:19 List the services that are enabled at a particular run level in linux server ?

Ans: With the help of command ‘chkconfig –list | grep 5:on’ we can list all the service that are enabled in run level5. For other run levels just replace 5 with the respective run level.

Q:20 How to enable a service at a particular run level ?

Ans: We can enable a service using the Command ‘chkconfig <Service-Name> on –level 3’

Also Read : How to Create Hard and Soft (symlink) Links on Linux Systems

Q:21 How to upgrade Kernel in Linux ?

Ans: We should never upgrade Linux Kernel , always install the new New kernel using rpm command because upgrading a kenel can make your linux box in a unbootable state.

Q:22 How To scan newly asssigned luns on linux box without rebooting ?

Ans: There are two ways to scan newly assigned luns :
Method:1 if sg3 rpm is installed , then run the command ‘rescan-scsi-bus.sh’
Method:2 Run the Command ,  echo ” – – – ” > /sys/class/scsi_host/hostX/scan

Q:23 How  to find WWN numbers of HBA cards in Linux Server ?

Ans: We can find the WWN numbers of HBA cards using the command ‘systool -c fc_host -v | grep port_name’

Q:24 How to add & change the Kernel parameters ?

Ans: To Set the kernel parameters in linux , first edit the file ‘/etc/sysctl.conf’ after making the changes save the file and run the command ‘sysctl -p’ , this command will make the changes permanently without rebooting the machine.

Q:25 What is Puppet Server ?

Ans: Puppet is an open-source & enterprise software for configuration management toll in UNIX like  operating system.  Puppet is a  IT automation software used to push configuration to its clients (puppet agents) using code. Puppet code can do a variety of tasks from installing new software, to check file permissions, or updating user accounts & lots of other tasks.

Q:26 What are manifests in Puppet ?

Ans: Manifests in Puppet are the files in which the client configuration is specified.

Q:27 Which Command is used to sign requested certificates in Puppet Server ?

Ans: ‘puppetca  –sign hostname-of-agent’ in (2.X)  & ‘puppet ca  sign hostname-of-agent’ in  (3.X)

Q:28  At which location  Puppet Master Stores Certificates ?

Ans:  /var/lib/puppet/ssl/ca/signed

Q:29 How to find all the regular files in a directory  ?

Ans: using the command ‘find /<directory -type f’.

Q:30 What is load average in Linux ?

Ans: Load  Average is defined as the average sum of the number of process waiting in the run queue and number of process currently executing over the period of 1,5 and 15  minutes. Using the ‘top’ and ‘uptime’ command we find the load average of a Linux sever.

